25.0 release notes: batch 3 (#13429)
apache/druid: docs/next-release-notes.md

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13097

### Kafka supervisor logging

Kafka supervisor logs are now less noisy. The supervisors now log events at the DEBUG level instead of INFO. 

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13392

### Fixed Overlord leader election

Fixed a problem where Overlord leader election failed due to lock reacquisition issues. Druid now fails these tasks and clears all locks so that the Overlord leader election isn't blocked.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13172

### Support for inline protobuf descriptor

Added a new `inline` type `protoBytesDecoder` that allows a user to pass inline the contents of a Protobuf descriptor file, encoded as a Base64 string.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13192

### Duplicate notices

For streaming ingestion, notices that are the same as one already in queue won't be enqueued. This will help reduce notice queue size. 

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13334

### When a Kafka stream becomes inactive, prevent Supervisor from creating new indexing tasks

Added Idle feature to `SeekableStreamSupervisor` for inactive stream.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13144

> ### 

Reviewer: empty heading?

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13280

### New metric for segments

`segment/handoff/time` captures the total time taken for handoff for a given set of published segments.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13238 

### Idle configs for the Supervisor

You can now configure the following properties:

| Property | Description | Default |
| - | - | -|
|`druid.supervisor.idleConfig.enabled`| (Cluster wide) If `true`, supervisor can become idle if there is no data on input stream/topic for some time.|false|
|`druid.supervisor.idleConfig.inactiveAfterMillis`| (Cluster wide) Supervisor is marked as idle if all existing data has been read from input topic and no new data has been published for `inactiveAfterMillis` milliseconds.|`600_000`|
| `inactiveAfterMillis` | (Individual Supervisor) Supervisor is marked as idle if all existing data has been read from input topic and no new data has been published for `inactiveAfterMillis` milliseconds. | no (default == `600_000`) |

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13311

> ### cachingCost balancer strategy

Reviewer: This too could be an item inside `segment loading and balancing improvements`

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13331
https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13313

### Backoff for HttpPostEmitter

The `HttpPostEmitter` option now has a backoff. This means that there should be less noise in the logs and lower CPU usage if you use this option for logging. 

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/12102

### taskActionType dimension for task/action/run/time metric

The `task/action/run/time` metric for the Indexing service now includes the `taskActionType` dimension.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13333

### DumpSegment tool for nested columns

The DumpSegment tool can now be used on nested columns with the `--dump nested` option. 

For more information, see [dump-segment tool](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/operations/dump-segment).

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13356

### Segment assignment

You can now use a round-robin segment strategy to speed up initial segment assignments.

Set `useRoundRobinSegmentAssigment` to `true` in the Coordinator dynamic config to enable this feature.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13367

> ### Segment balancing

Reviewer: Do you think it would be better to club the `segment balancing`, `segment replication` and `segment assignment` under one heading? They are all related coordinator-side changes which improve segment loading and balancing.

Author: I'll move them under an H3 called `Segments` and put assignment, balancing, replication, and discovery as H4s underneeth

Once the WorkerClient writes it's outputs to the durable storage, it adds a file with `__success` in the `workerNumber` output directory for that stage and with its `taskId`. This allows you to determine the worker, which has successfully written its outputs to the durable storage, and differentiate from the partial outputs by orphan or failed worker tasks.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13062

### Sketch merging mode

When a query requires key statistics to generate partition boundaries, key statistics are gathered by the workers while reading rows from the datasource.You can now configure whether the MSQ task engine does this task in parallel or sequentially. Configure the behavior using `clusterStatisticsMergeMode` context parameter. For more information, see [Sketch merging mode](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/multi-stage-query/reference.html#sketch-merging-mode).

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13205 

## Querying

### Improvements to querying user experience

This release includes several improvements for querying:

* Exposed HTTP response headers for SQL queries (https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13052)

> * Added the `shouldFinalize` feature for HLL and quantiles sketches. Druid will no longer finalize aggregators when:

Author: @vtlim will work on the doc updates

> * Added the `shouldFinalize` feature for HLL and quantiles sketches. Druid will no longer finalize aggregators when:

Reviewer 2: PR: https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13524

Introduced a `tree` type to `flattenSpec`. In the event that a simple hierarchical lookup is required, the `tree` type allows for faster JSON parsing than `jq` and `path` parsing types.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/12177

## Operations

### Compaction

Compaction behavior has changed to improve the amount of time it takes and disk space it takes:

- When segments need to be fetched, download them one at a time and delete them when Druid is done with them. This still takes time but minimizes the required disk space.
- Don't fetch segments on the main compact task when they aren't needed. If the user provides a full `granularitySpec`, `dimensionsSpec`, and `metricsSpec`, Druid skips fetching segments.

For more information, see the documentation on [Compaction](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/data-management/compaction.html) and [Automatic compaction](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/data-management/automatic-compaction.html).

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13280

### New metric for segments

`segment/handoff/time` captures the total time taken for handoff for a given set of published segments.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13238 

> ### Idle configs for the Supervisor

Reviewer 3: I think we should explain to the reader that it's now possible to set supervisor to ideal. This is useful in cases of freeing up slots such that auto-scaling can kick in more effectively.

You can now configure the following properties:

| Property | Description | Default |
| - | - | -|
|`druid.supervisor.idleConfig.enabled`| (Cluster wide) If `true`, supervisor can become idle if there is no data on input stream/topic for some time.|false|
|`druid.supervisor.idleConfig.inactiveAfterMillis`| (Cluster wide) Supervisor is marked as idle if all existing data has been read from input topic and no new data has been published for `inactiveAfterMillis` milliseconds.|`600_000`|
| `inactiveAfterMillis` | (Individual Supervisor) Supervisor is marked as idle if all existing data has been read from input topic and no new data has been published for `inactiveAfterMillis` milliseconds. | no (default == `600_000`) |

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13311

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13321

### New metrics for streaming ingestion

> 

Reviewer 3: Those should go into metrics section.

The following metrics related to streaming ingestion have been added:

- `ingest/kafka/partitionLag`: Partition-wise lag between the offsets consumed by the Kafka indexing tasks and latest offsets in Kafka brokers. 
- `ingest/kinesis/partitionLag/time`: Partition-wise lag time in milliseconds between the current message sequence number consumed by the Kinesis indexing tasks and latest sequence number in Kinesis.
- `ingest/pause/time`: Milliseconds spent by a task in a paused state without ingesting.|dataSource, taskId| < 10 seconds.|

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13331
https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13313

### Backoff for HttpPostEmitter

The `HttpPostEmitter` option now has a backoff. This means that there should be less noise in the logs and lower CPU usage if you use this option for logging. 

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/12102

### taskActionType dimension for task/action/run/time metric

> 

Reviewer 3: This should also go into the metrics section.

The `task/action/run/time` metric for the Indexing service now includes the `taskActionType` dimension.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13333

### DumpSegment tool for nested columns

The DumpSegment tool can now be used on nested columns with the `--dump nested` option. 

For more information, see [dump-segment tool](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/operations/dump-segment).

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13356

> ### Segmen loading and balancings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Segment loading and balancing
```

#### cachingCost balancer strategy

The `cachingCost` balancer strategy now behaves more similarly to cost strategy. When computing the cost of moving a segment to a server, the following calculations are performed:

- Subtract the self cost of a segment if it is being served by the target server
- Subtract the cost of segments that are marked to be dropped

#### Segment assignment

You can now use a round-robin segment strategy to speed up initial segment assignments.

Set `useRoundRobinSegmentAssigment` to `true` in the Coordinator dynamic config to enable this feature.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13367

> #### Segment batch balancing

Reviewer 3: This needs to be highlighted as a behavior change after the highlight section.

> #### Segment batch balancing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Segment batch sampling
```

Batch sampling is now the default method for sampling segments during balancing as it performs significantly better than the alternative when there is a large number of used segments in the cluster.

> As part of this change, the following properties have been deprecated and will be removed in future releases:
> 
> - `coordinator dynamic config useBatchedSegmentSampler`
> - `coordinator dynamic config percentOfSegmentsToConsiderPerMove`
> - non-batch method of sampling segments used during coordinator duty `BalanceSegments`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of this change, the following have been deprecated and will be removed in future releases:

- coordinator dynamic config `useBatchedSegmentSampler`
- coordinator dynamic config `percentOfSegmentsToConsiderPerMove`
- non-batch method of sampling segments used by coordinator duty `BalanceSegments`
```

The unused coordinator property `druid.coordinator.loadqueuepeon.repeatDelay` has been removed.

> Use only `druid.coordinator.loadqueuepeon.http.repeatDelay` to configure repeat delay for the HTTP-based segment loading queue.

Reviewer: These two items should either be under the heading `Segment assignment` or a separate heading titled `Segment load queue peon`.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13391

> #### Segment discovery

Reviewer 3: This is also a behavior change that we should highlight.

Reviewer 3: As part of this highlight, you should include details on how to revert to old behavior.

The default segment discovery method now uses HTTP instead of ZooKeeper.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13092

#### Segment replication

Improved the process of checking server inventory to prevent over-replication of segments during segment balancing.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13114

### Memory estimates

The task context flag `useMaxMemoryEstimates` is now set to false by default to improve memory usage estimation.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13178

> ### Docker improvements

Reviewer 3: This should go into the "Dependency updates" section

Updated dependencies for the Druid image for Docker, including JRE 11. Docker BuildKit cache is enabled to speed up building.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13059

> ### Kill tasks do not include markAsUnuseddone

Reviewer 3: This is also a behavior change.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13101

### Provided service specific log4j overrides in containerized deployments

Provided an option to override log4j configs setup at the service level directories so that it works with Druid-operator based deployments.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13020

### Various Docker improvements

* Updated Docker to run with JRE 11 by default.
* Updated Docker to use [`gcr.io/distroless/java11-debian11`](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/distroless) image as base by default.
* Enabled Docker buildkit cache to speed up building.
* Downloaded [`bash-static`](https://github.com/robxu9/bash-static) to the Docker image so that scripts that require bash can be executed.
* Bumped builder image from `3.8.4-jdk-11-slim` to `3.8.6-jdk-11-slim`.
* Switched busybox from `amd64/busybox:1.30.0-glibc` to `busybox:1.35.0-glibc`.
* Added support to build arm64-based image.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13059

> ### Improved supervisor termination

Reviewer 3: This should be moved together with other supervisor idle stuff.

Fixed issues with delayed supervisor termination during certain transient states.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13072

### Fixed a problem when running Druid with JDK11+

Export `com.sun.management.internal` when running Druid under JRE11 and JRE17.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13068

### Enabled cleaner JSON for various input sources and formats

Added `JsonInclude` to various properties, to avoid population of default values in serialized JSON.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13064

> ### Improved metric reporting

Reviewer 3: This should go into metrics section.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13287

## Extensions

### Extension optimization

Optimized the `compareTo` function in `CompressedBigDecimal`.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13086

### CompressedBigDecimal cleanup and extension

Removed unnecessary generic type from CompressedBigDecimal, added support for number input types, added support for reading aggregator input types directly (uningested data), and fixed scaling bug in buffer aggregator.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13048

### Support for running tasks as Kubernetes jobs

Added an extension that allows Druid to use Kubernetes for launching and managing tasks, eliminating the need for MiddleManagers.
To use this extension, [include](../extensions.md#loading-extensions) `druid-kubernetes-overlord-extensions` in the extensions load list for your Overlord process.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13156

### Support for Kubernetes discovery

Added `POD_NAME` and `POD_NAMESPACE` env variables to all Kubernetes Deployments and StatefulSets.
Helm deployment is now compatible with `druid-kubernetes-extension`.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13262

> ## Web console

Reviewer 3: Web console should be moved above extensions

The web console now allows you to add to existing filters for a selected column.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13169

### Ability to add issue comments

You can now add an issue comment in SQL, for example `--:ISSUE: this is an issue` that is rendered in red and prevents the SQL from running. The comments are used by the spec-to-SQL converter to indicate that something could not be converted.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13136

### Support for Kafka lookups

Added support for Kafka-based lookups rendering and input in the web console.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13098

### Improved array detection

Added better detection for arrays containing objects.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13077

### Updated Druid Query Toolkit version

[Druid Query Toolkit](https://www.npmjs.com/package/druid-query-toolkit) version 0.16.1 adds quotes to references in auto generated queries by default.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13243

### Query task status information

The web console now exposes a textual indication about running and pending tasks when a query is stuck due to lack of task slots.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13291

> ### Query history

Reviewer 3: This should move to MSQ section.

    
https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13247

### Kill tasks do not include markAsUnuseddone

When you kill a task, Druid no longer automatically marks segments as unused. You must explicitly mark them as unused with `POST /druid/coordinator/v1/datasources/{dataSourceName}/markUnused`. 
For more information, see the [API reference](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/operations/api-reference.html#coordinator)

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13104

### Segment discovery

The default segment discovery method now uses HTTP instead of ZooKeeper.

This update changes the defaults for the following properties:

| Property | New default | Previous default | 
| - | - | - |
| `druid.serverview.type` for segment management | http | batch |
| `druid.coordinator.loadqueuepeon.type` for segment management | http | curator |
| `druid.indexer.runner.type` for the Overlord | httpRemote | local |

To use ZooKeeper instead of HTTP, change the values for the properties back to the previous defaults.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13092

## Multi-stage query task engine

> ### Worker retry
> 
> The MSQ controller task now retries worker tasks if they fail up to two times. The maximum number of total retries for a job across all workers is 30.
> 
> https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13353
> 

Reviewer 4: This might not make it to the 25.0 release. So I suggest removing this. 
```suggestion
```

This change aligns the behavior of HLL and quantiles sketches with theta sketches.

To provide backwards compatibility, you can use the `sqlFinalizeOuterSketches` query context parameter that restores the old behavior. 
    
https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13247

### Kill tasks do not include markAsUnuseddone

When you kill a task, Druid no longer automatically marks segments as unused. You must explicitly mark them as unused with `POST /druid/coordinator/v1/datasources/{dataSourceName}/markUnused`. 
For more information, see the [API reference](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/operations/api-reference.html#coordinator)

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13104

### Segment discovery

The default segment discovery method now uses HTTP instead of ZooKeeper.

This update changes the defaults for the following properties:

| Property | New default | Previous default | 
| - | - | - |
| `druid.serverview.type` for segment management | http | batch |
| `druid.coordinator.loadqueuepeon.type` for segment management | http | curator |
| `druid.indexer.runner.type` for the Overlord | httpRemote | local |

> To use ZooKeeper instead of HTTP, change the values for the properties back to the previous defaults.

Reviewer: We should also mention that the Zookeeper based implementations for the above items are now deprecated and will be removed in subsequent releases.

### Added new configuration keys to query context security model

Added the following configuration properties that refine the query context security model controlled by `druid.auth.authorizeQueryContextParams`:

* `druid.auth.unsecuredContextKeys`: A JSON list of query context keys that do not require a security check.
* `druid.auth.securedContextKeys`: A JSON list of query context keys that do require a security check.

If both are set, `unsecuredContextKeys` acts as exceptions to `securedContextKeys`..

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13071

## Metrics

### Improved metric reporting

Improved global-cached-lookups metric reporting.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13219

### New metric for segment handoff

`segment/handoff/time` captures the total time taken for handoff for a given set of published segments.

https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13238 

### New metrics for segment allocation 

Segment allocation can now be performed in batches, which can improve performance and decrease ingestion lag. For more information about this change, see [Segment batch allocation](#segment-batch-allocation). The following metrics correspond to those changes.

> Metrics for batch segment allocation (dims: dataSource, taskActionType=segmentAllocate):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics emitted for a batch segment allocate requests (dims: dataSource, taskActionType=segmentAllocate):
```

- `task/action/batch/runTime`: Milliseconds taken to execute a batch of task actions. Currently only being emitted for [batched `segmentAllocate` actions

> - task/action/batch/queueTime: Milliseconds spent by a batch of task actions in queue. Currently only being emitted for [batched `segmentAllocate` actions](#segment-batch-allocation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `task/action/batch/queueTime`: Milliseconds spent by a batch of task actions in queue. Currently only being emitted for [batched `segmentAllocate` actions](#segment-batch-allocation).
```

- `task/action/batch/size`: Number of task actions in a batch that was executed during the emission period. Currently only being emitted for [batched `segmentAllocate` actions](#segment-batch-allocation).
- `task/action/batch/attempts`: Number of execution attempts for a single batch of task actions. Currently only being emitted for [batched `segmentAllocate` actions](#segment-batch-allocation). 

> Metrics for a request (dims: taskId, taskType, dataSource, taskActionType=segmentAllocate):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics emitted for a single segment allocate request (dims: taskId, taskType, dataSource, taskActionType=segmentAllocate):
```

## Operations

> ### Deploying Druid

Reviewer: This item should be in the highlights.

> There is now a Python installation script available for Druid that simplifies deployments that don't fit the parameters of the singel-server profiles, such as the nano or micro-quickstart profiles. This `start-druid` script lets you override Druid settings to fit your needs. For more information, see [Single server deployment](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/operations/single-server.html).

Reviewer: The new script simplifies deployments for all cases, not just the ones that don't fit the existing single-server profiles. We could probably rephrase this section as follows:

```suggestion
The new `start-druid` script greatly simplifies starting any combination of Druid services on a single-server. It comes pre-packaged with the required configs and can be used to launch a fully functional Druid cluster simply by invoking `./start-druid`. For the experienced Druids, it also gives you complete control over the runtime properties and JVM arguments to have a cluster that exactly fits your needs.

The `start-druid` script deprecates the existing profiles such as `start-micro-quickstart` and `start-nano-quickstart`. These profiles may be removed in future releases. For more information, see [Single server deployment](https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/operations/single-server.html).
```

@vogievetsky , does this capture our sentiments adequately?

Reviewer 2: I [moved this section to the highlights](https://github.com/apache/druid/pull/13429#discussion_r1050809228) and also used the text from this comment.
